---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "The effect of UI frameworks on efficacy"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2024-09-23
published: true
labels:
  - UI frameworks
---
User interface frameworks have become widely adopted because of how streamlined they are, and how easy it is to create responsive designs, especially in larger teams because of the consistency. They can be pretty challenging to master, as you have to take time to learn and research all of the functionality, almost as if you are learning part of a new language. However, in my opinion, and experience, using frameworks like Tailwind or bootstrap are worth the extra time and effort it takes to be able to use them efficiently, because of how powerful they are. 
UI frameworks mitigate the standard challenges a developer would face with using raw HTML and CSS, allowing for ease of scalability, design consistency, and many other advantages, with very little comparable drawbacks. They are ultimately worth the time investment, with how much they impact modern programming in both learning and work environments. 

In the development of a website, using raw HTML and CSS gives me complete freedom and control over the design, functionality and feel of the elements. Each element is styled and designed individually, and it is all done by me. This innate control is attractive, but perfection in this is unfortunately, extremely time consuming. Even the smallest things, like buttons or navigation bars can take a significant amount of time to try to style, or respond, in the way you want. 
The fact that it does allow for complete freedom is also a weakness, as there is no structured system to keep the code consistent. Unless there is a rigid and expansive set of design principles and coding conventions within the project, it is really easy to have differences in styling for different elements, especially when you are working in larger group projects, or have different people collaborating on the code. This is where UI frameworks come in. They help to combat the lack of systems, allow for screen size adaptability and keep the design elements consistent, and much, much more.

Bootstrap is one of the most popular UI frameworks in the world, and provides robust features for a frontend development toolkit. It has a vast number of prebuilt components, as well as a customizable architecture, allowing you to write your own CSS variables, or use theirs, or both, making it an extremely powerful tool for frontend developers. The process of learning bootstrap has been interesting, but I will say it has been a valuable tool to work with in the WODs we have been doing most days a week for this class. It allows me to create professional looking websites and icons with ease, and in a short time, since this course demands performance under time pressure. The consistent design system also helps to create a polished and professional look, as the built in styles we are using to create the websites are really helpful, especially in recreating websites in the WODs. The core benefit of having a framework such as Bootstrap 5, is the simplicity of code and the ease that brings to styling and creating responsive, sleek websites. 
The comprehensive and accessible documentation and community collaboration makes it really easy to find the components you need, and troubleshoot any issues you come across. This makes the framework well suited for learning environments, such as our course.
However, with the nature of consistency, comes reduced flexibility with style and personal creativity. Customization of bootstrap can be a really complex challenge, and requires me to have a good understanding of Sass variables and mixins, something that many developers at this stage don't have. 
Despite the limitations of Bootstrap and the difficulty that comes with customization, the standards it follows make it an ideal choice for collaborative projects that don’t have a massively pedantic design style, or for learning environments for college students. 

Working with Tailwind and React within a professional environment was a really great introduction into UI frameworks and the power they have for development. I learned to use these concurrently to learning javascript and typescript, so my learning of the languages became synergistic with the UI frameworks, skipping the usual learning period like we currently have for Bootstrap 5. It was really informative experiencing the benefits first hand when working on the components I was designing and developing, and within the team collaboration at the startup where I was working. The synergy of these tools allowed me, and the other developers, to build dynamic, responsive, component driven UI’s that are consistent and maintainable for longer term development. Tailwind’s stylistic power combined with Reacts component based framework architecture, allowed us to create styles and designs within the components. This setup made it easy to create and then reuse components throughout the development process. Here are some examples of the ease of code and the outputs they create, showcasing the power of these UI frameworks.

While UI frameworks can be tedious and require some significant upfront learning to be able to use effectively, the investment of that learning time pays off greatly in your subsequent development projects. These frameworks allow for faster development, consistent design, easier collaborations and overall a better user experience. Whether you choose to use Bootstrap, or React, or something entirely different, frameworks like these are powerful tools to increase your front end development capabilities, and they are important to learn and implement in future projects. 
